Julie Kennel: Welcome to Week 6,
Julie Kennel: where we'll talk about food on a healthy budget.
Julie Kennel: Is it true that healthy foods cost more?
Julie Kennel: Sometimes
Julie Kennel: compare this apple, which we know to be rich in fiber, Quercetin.
Julie Kennel: vitamin, c, and other nutrients.
Julie Kennel: and it might cost anywhere between 45 cents and a dollar 29.
Julie Kennel: If you're buying organic.
Julie Kennel: it's probably closer to a dollar 59 each.
Julie Kennel: and then we have on the right hand side a 30 pack of snacks.
Julie Kennel: These snacks probably contain some b vitamins, and about double the amount of calories as the apple.
Julie Kennel: If we're lucky, we can find these on sale for about 43 cents a pack.
Julie Kennel: So, comparing the cost of these 2 items.
Julie Kennel: that pack of sugary snack might cost half as much as the apple.
Julie Kennel: we'll take another example, comparing fast food, hamburger meal with French fries and a soda
Julie Kennel: like to a healthier option at perhaps a sit-down restaurant.
Julie Kennel: This one in particular reminds me of North Star and their veggie burger.
Julie Kennel: that Burger is going to be rich in fruits, vegetables.
Julie Kennel: fiber.
Julie Kennel: all kinds of nutrients, making it a much healthier choice than the fast food option.
Julie Kennel: but it's probably also going to be a good 8 or $9. More expensive
Julie Kennel: eating out
Julie Kennel: can be cheaper than eating at home.
Julie Kennel: but eating out can also be a lot more expensive.
Julie Kennel: So strategies for lowering food costs are going to be eating at home. But we'll also talk about how to lower those food costs. When you are eating out as well.
Julie Kennel: we'll talk about making a plan.
Julie Kennel: shopping smart and reducing food wastes.
Julie Kennel: What's the research say about how expensive a home cooked meal is versus eating out.
Julie Kennel: We see here that the most recent suggestion is that the average home cooked meal is about $4 and 23 cents
Julie Kennel: versus $16 for eating out.
Julie Kennel: The exact cost really depends on a variety of factors, including a person's lifestyle
Julie Kennel: and their food choices.
Julie Kennel: It may also depend on which meal you're eating out, as sometimes breakfast can be cheaper option compared to lunch and dinner
Julie Kennel: when making meals at home. That average cost probably depends on how smart you're shopping.
Julie Kennel: and whether or not you're choosing proteins that are affordable compared to those that can get quite expensive.
Julie Kennel: but overall eating out can cost over $13,000 more per year compared to cooking at home.
Julie Kennel: So maybe this is a good incentive. In addition to the fact that eating at home is often more nutritious.
Julie Kennel: less high in sodium, less high in fat and less high in added sugars.
Julie Kennel: some pro tips for getting started with eating and drinking at home
Julie Kennel: would be to just start somewhere and start simple.
Julie Kennel: You can think about replacing one meal out with one at home each week.
Julie Kennel: Maybe there's a meal that's particularly expensive for you, but it just happens to be very convenient, and often feels like a reward.
Julie Kennel: maybe start there with how you can make a change so that you can replicate that meal at home, or perhaps replicate it with a meal that you find equally satisfying.
Julie Kennel: Another tip is to
Julie Kennel: brew coffee or tea at home
Julie Kennel: with the cost of coffee and coffee shops. Continuing to go up right, switch out that specialty beverage or brew for a nice home brewed version.
Julie Kennel: And if you're lucky, you can ask for coffee maker and espresso maker something that suits your needs as a gift to make this even easier.
Julie Kennel: Another idea is to invite friends to eat with you.
Julie Kennel: Sometimes it's nt very fun to cook for one person. Sometimes it's challenging to do just that. So invite your friends over to eat with you, or maybe start a dinner club or a meal club, where you rotate houses or rotate, who's in charge of making that meal?
Julie Kennel: Finally, drinking water instead of soda or juices, is another great way to save on costs.
Julie Kennel: Sure, you might have more of an investment upfront if you're purchasing a water bottle or 2 or 3.
Julie Kennel: But overall you will end up saving money.
Julie Kennel: And typically those sodas and juices are not offering a lot of nutrition, but mostly just calories or empty fluid.
Julie Kennel: Now, if you do find yourself eating out, because we all do every once in a while
Julie Kennel: think about how to save money.
Julie Kennel: One good way to do that is, to skip the drinks which are often marked up significantly at restaurants.
Julie Kennel: Also skip dessert, as many high volume restaurants outsource their desserts. So it's something that you could buy at the store just like they do
Julie Kennel: also, skipping dessert may help you save on calories, empty calories, or excess calories that you're really not even hungry for.
Julie Kennel: and maybe switching that out for having an oreo, or a small cookie, or a small piece of chocolate at home, would be a much better way of finishing off the night.
Julie Kennel: Think about sharing a meal as oftentimes restaurant servings are quite large.
Julie Kennel: Sharing a meal can also be kind of fun.
Julie Kennel: and you could even share a meal and an appetizer, and therefore having a couple of different dishes, and maintaining that variety that you might like when you eat out
Julie Kennel: you could go to happy hour and use the happy hour prices to help with discounted foods and drinks.
Julie Kennel: and lastly, order an appetizer as your meal right? Maybe there's something that you really want to try, and likely in some cases, because of the size of the appetizer. You may not even be hungry by the time that you get to your actual meal
Julie Kennel: after you figure out how you're going to eat at home.
Julie Kennel: Want to think about making a plan.
Julie Kennel: Choose one time a week to meal plan. Maybe this is on Sunday night
Julie Kennel: when you're watching a little bit of TV and catching up with friends.
Julie Kennel: Maybe it's more like a Monday night or a Wednesday night in the middle of the week, knowing that you're gonna grocery shop in a couple of days.
Julie Kennel: whatever that time is for you. Right, make it a routine
Julie Kennel: and something that you carve out to do on a regular basis.
Julie Kennel: You don't have to plan everything out for the week that could get overwhelming.
Julie Kennel: What you want to do is start by just planning out one or 2, maybe 3, at the most larger meals to cook each week and then get as much done on the weekends as possible with some meal. Prep.
Julie Kennel: See what you already have.
Julie Kennel: What's in your cupboards? What's in your freezer?
Julie Kennel: What's in the refrigerator, and what can you use in your meal? Plan this week?
Julie Kennel: Then write out your meal plan.
Julie Kennel: Now. You might want to do this on paper
Julie Kennel: in a journal, or maybe on your phone, which will help you create. There's some ways in which they can help you create a list.
Julie Kennel: Maybe you write it on the refrigerator and keep a list going there, and when the mood strikes you, you write down some new ideas
Julie Kennel: wherever it is again, make it a habit. Right? Designate a spot and write out your meal plan.
Julie Kennel: After you make that meal plan you'll be able to make a grocery list with all of the items that you need in order to make those meals.
Julie Kennel: There's definitely some good ways to go about doing this. And again, I like to keep it simple.
Julie Kennel: finding recipes that have a long list of ingredients that you may or may not h�ave is frustrating, and it makes it overwhelming.
Julie Kennel: So look for recipes with 5 ingredients or less.
Julie Kennel: If you find a recipe that you really want to try, and it has more than 5 ingredients.
Julie Kennel: then maybe look to see which ingredients you could leave out.
Julie Kennel: Not all the herbs and spices are always needed.
Julie Kennel: Also choose recipes that take 20 min or less prep time.
Julie Kennel: I like to find recipes that have 10 min or less prep time.
Julie Kennel: The prep. Time is really the amount of time that you're going to spend in the kitchen working on it.
Julie Kennel: It doesn't include, like the baking time or the cooking time.
Julie Kennel: which is really time that you can spend doing other things
Julie Kennel: so 20 min or less is a good starting point.
Julie Kennel: you will get more efficient with your time, the more that you cook and build your skills. Maybe even let take a couple of classes on Youtube, on how to do knife cuts.
Julie Kennel: and you can invite friends to do this together, so that meal prepping becomes a fun activity, something social.
Julie Kennel: Choose a time to make these meals when you have the most time
Julie Kennel: figuring out again. When is that for you? When won't you be stressed about turning in homework or getting an assignment done?
Julie Kennel: Use that time, then, whatever it is that you have, if you designate that you have 20 min to meal. Prep, or make a meal great.
Julie Kennel: If you have 30, use 30.
Julie Kennel: If you have 60 min of a time, maybe there's some extra things you can get done to help you prep for breakfast and lunches in the coming week. In addition to those couple of dinner meals that you have slated from your meal plan.
Julie Kennel: I thought I'd share with you some of the resources that college students and others often find helpful or exciting.
Julie Kennel: One of those is a website called Budget Bites. I really like this because it is simple, like we said recipes with few ingredients.
Julie Kennel: pretty short prep. Times depending on the recipe that you choose, and I like that. They give you the cost per serving so you can really determine if it's going to fit in your food budget for the week
Julie Kennel: and includes all kinds of foods you see here on the web page right now they're featuring an in season type of cookie
Julie Kennel: as well as more of a dinner recipe.
Julie Kennel: as well as like a side dish, or like a couturement like a topping that you might use on top of of a vegetable or meat dish.
Julie Kennel: so check out budget bites, and see what you think. They have a lot of great tabs that can help you with a variety of different aspects when you're planning your meals.
Julie Kennel: Another idea is to make a simple list yourself of the foods that you like across categories.
Julie Kennel: When we're talking about making a meal, we want to think about including at least 3 different types of foods from 3 different food groups.
Julie Kennel: I like to make a sheet where I'm just listing out a bunch of proteins, followed by a bunch of grains, followed by a bunch of vegetables.
Julie Kennel: If we use that, like my plate scenario, about half my plate's going to become the vegetable. A quarter of it's going to be the grain, and a quarter of it's going to be the protein.
Julie Kennel: and by making a list like this, of all the different possibilities that either I like or I have on hand, then I can mix and match and get creative with what I make.
Julie Kennel: or I can just keep it really simple.
Julie Kennel: I also like to choose proteins that are quick.
Julie Kennel: They cook quickly, or they take very little prep time.
Julie Kennel: So those are things like shrimp pork loin that you just have to take out of the bag and put in the oven
Julie Kennel: salmon
Julie Kennel: that I can place on a sheet with some vegetables, and it's, and therefore it gets made all at the same time.
Julie Kennel: Sometimes I like to do refried beans which don't really even involve any cooking at all.
Julie Kennel: So it's good to have these options there, especially when you have a busy week.
Julie Kennel: Those grain items are going to be a mix of whole grains and refined grains.
Julie Kennel: Some of the grains are really vegetables, like mashed potatoes, and that's okay. Mashed potatoes are in tater tots are a starchy type of vegetable, often with the nutrient composition of other grains.
Julie Kennel: and finally, those vegetables. I can either do raw or cooked, and I can think about different ways of making them, either from a frozen bag or from a raw state, maybe roasted in the oven.
Julie Kennel: I like to think here about to you about using a lot of different colored vegetables. Remember that every different color of vegetable is going to provide a different set of nutrients and antioxidants.
Julie Kennel: So when you're planning your meals, kind of think through the different colors and what you want to see represented on that week.
Julie Kennel: and I have a little note at the bottom for me or for my family to add in to say, Hey, I got an idea for next week. Let's try this.
Julie Kennel: I'll also feature one app in particular with the caveat of saying that there are actually quite a few of these types of apps
Julie Kennel: that will not only help you meal plan, but they'll help you select your favorite recipes, create and create your grocery lists. It's kind of like a 1 size or one stop fits all.
Julie Kennel: You can sync it with your different devices. I believe you can share it out with friends and family, and get ideas from them as well.
Julie Kennel: So when you have a recipe that you like, you save it to the app.
Julie Kennel: it helps generate a grocery list from the recipe, and then it helps you figure out when to make that meal or how to slate it into your overall meal plan based on your calendar.
Julie Kennel: There might be a little bit of a cost involved with some of these apps.
Julie Kennel: but I do feel like it's worth it, especially with the money that you're saving cooking at home versus eating out.
Julie Kennel: Once you have that meal plan together, you're really gonna focus on shopping smart.
Julie Kennel: What do we mean by that that means this is where the rubber hits the road. Right? This is where you're going to go to the grocery store and use the budget that you have to buy the supplies that you need for as long as possible.
Julie Kennel: One of the best ways to do this is to buy a mix of shelf, stable, frozen and perishable items
Julie Kennel: that way you don't rely. You don't have to rely on just having fresh, which eventually is going to go bad
Julie Kennel: like those bananas.
Julie Kennel: There is only going to be a couple of days in that window that you're really gonna like the texture and consistency of that banana
Julie Kennel: all the other days. It's gonna be too raw or too ripe
Julie Kennel: that can happen to a variety of different fruits and vegetables, so it can be good to stock up on frozen forms of fruits and vegetables, as well as canned forms of fruits and vegetables.
Julie Kennel: When you're looking for those frozen and canned options, look for the options in which it's pretty much just the fruit or vegetable itself.
Julie Kennel: Added sauces can really add flavor, but they can also add quite a bit of fat, too. So just look at the label and determine if that's something that's fitting into your goals for the day
Julie Kennel: with the fruit. Oftentimes it's canned in either a heavy syrup or a light syrup, or in its own juices.
Julie Kennel: look for those that are are canned, and their own juices, that has the least amount of extra sugars or added sugars.
Julie Kennel: frozen fresh canned fruits and vegetables are all nutritious.
Julie Kennel: so there's no reason to feel like you shouldn't have one form of them, just because it's nt fresh.
Julie Kennel: Oftentimes these days the process is used to freeze and to can
Julie Kennel: are just as good as retaining nutrients compared to that fresh version tha{ may have traveled thousands of miles to get to the grocery store to sit for quite some time
Julie Kennel: anytime that fruits and vegetables are exposed to light and air. They're gonna lose nutrients so frozen and canned options we don't have to feel bad about use them shop smart.
Julie Kennel: Another idea is to make sure that you're buying in season produce when it's in season. It means cheaper.
Julie Kennel: and I'll show you some ideas in order to identify
Julie Kennel: when fruits and vegetables are, in fact, in season.
Julie Kennel: Also finding whole grains that are cheap is a good important tip.
Julie Kennel: There's lots of options here.
Julie Kennel: brown rice.
Julie Kennel: whole grain, pasta.
Julie Kennel: quinoa.
Julie Kennel: whole wheat, bread.
Julie Kennel: oats, and oatmeal, as well as cornmeal, are all very affordable. Whole grain options to put into the mix.
Julie Kennel: This is a site from Usda that I really like.
Julie Kennel: It helps us see which are the fruits and vegetables that are the most affordable.
Julie Kennel: And it's pretty interactive. So this is just a partial viewing of what it will do, but it allows the user to select specific fruits or vegetables from the in the desired form.
Julie Kennel: such as fresh.
Julie Kennel: and then 2 dropdown menus control the output displayed.
Julie Kennel: If a user selects vegetables rather than fruits.
Julie Kennel: and then they can select something like sweet corn from the upper. Drop down menu as the type of vegetable.
Julie Kennel: and and you can also set the lower dropdown menu in the form of that vegetable that you want to have canned, fresh or frozen, will all be displayed.
Julie Kennel: So it really gives you a sense of how and how to comare across roots, but also comparing in the form that makes the most sense.
Julie Kennel: In this case, the fruit that was chosen looks like it's apricots, apples, grapes, watermelon.
Julie Kennel: and it's comparing some of the prices of those of those fruits across canned, dried, fresh, and juice
Julie Kennel: right away. We noticed some trends
Julie Kennel: that those fresh options really vary all the way from
Julie Kennel: point 2 4 24 cents per serving of watermelon
Julie Kennel: up to apricots, fresh apricots that are a dollar 41
Julie Kennel: per serving.
Julie Kennel: This tells us that there are definitely some fruits and vegetables that are a lot more affordable than others, regardless of what season we're in.
Julie Kennel: Often those are things that are a little bit larger in size, like watermelon, cantaloupe, honeydew, pineapple.
Julie Kennel: But this chart will help you determine lots of other ideas.
Julie Kennel: We can also see that fresh isn't always the most expensive, sometimes canned is the most expensive.
Julie Kennel: and on here we do not see represented frozen fruit, which is also a good option. In some cases
Julie Kennel: there's another listing that you could reference. I put the website here.
Julie Kennel: It comes from a site called How to Cook.
Julie Kennel: and it has an ultimate fruit and veggie price chart.
Julie Kennel: This price chart is much too big to include on a single Powerpoint slide.
Julie Kennel: It has, like at least 50 different fruits and vegetables at all different price points.
Julie Kennel: I started off with the lowest price points again. These are set up so that they are comparing
Julie Kennel: fruits and vegetables in terms of a serving size, or how much you would typically eat.
Julie Kennel: And you'll see that pinto beans, right? Are the cheapest dried pinto beans are the cheapest form of vegetables on this list.
Julie Kennel: But there are a couple things here that might really surprise you, such as seeing fresh potatoes, which are very affordable at 20 cents a serving. You see that watermelon again, followed by a lot of beans and lentils.
Julie Kennel: carrots, whole raw fresh carrots also show up at 24 cents per serving
Julie Kennel: as well as apple juice from concentrate.
Julie Kennel: So I have a couple of slides here that see that where it allows you to kind of see the progression.
Julie Kennel: as the fruits and vegetables get more expensive.
Julie Kennel: But I noticed that there's still a lot of really good options, bananas.
Julie Kennel: cucumbers, lettuce.
Julie Kennel: green beans right? These are all foods that are quite affordable.
Julie Kennel: The Usda also has a site that allows us to see what seasonal or in-season produce is.
Julie Kennel: and you can't tell here. But if you were to go to this site and click on something in particular like
Julie Kennel: carrots.
Julie Kennel: it would tell you a lot more about carrots, how to fix carrots, how to prepare carrots, some fun recipes that you'll find carrots in.
Julie Kennel: So if you go to this Usda seasonal produce guide. I just selected the one for fall.
Julie Kennel: Maybe there's fruits and vegetables here that you have no idea what to do with.
Julie Kennel: and that's part of the fun
Julie Kennel: selecting something, learning a little bit more about it, and perhaps giving it a try when it is in season. That means most tasty and most affordable
Julie Kennel: a lot of people these days are focused on protein and making sure that they get enough protein in their diet.
Julie Kennel: In fact, a lot of people are shooting for like fairly high protein diet. So what do we do about that?
Julie Kennel: How do we eat proteins on a budget?
Julie Kennel: Some low cost protein foods include beans, peas and lentils, such as kidney beans, split peas and garbanzo beans or chickpeas.
Julie Kennel: These can come in a dried form, or my preferred source is a canned form and the canned form. They're already cooked and ready to go. I'm basically just opening up that can rinsing it out, rinsing it off and using the beans or lentils that are in there.
Julie Kennel: Beans, peas, and lentils cost less than similar amounts of other protein foods. So you get a lot of bang for your buck and those beans and peas also count as vegetables. So you're getting your protein and your vegetables on a single food.
Julie Kennel: However, we for people who like to eat meat or enjoy meat.
Julie Kennel: You can lower meat costs by buying the family size or the value pack and freezing. What you don't use.
Julie Kennel: Meat tends to freeze pretty well all forms of it.
Julie Kennel: So even if you buy it fresh, you can put it in the freezer until you need it later.
Julie Kennel: You can also use that same approach that we saw with fruits and vegetables to buy canned tuna or salmon, which is often the cheapest form in which those fish come.
Julie Kennel: it's also really convenient.
Julie Kennel: not canned. Maybe you buy it in a tuna pack.
Julie Kennel: and if you're buying it fresh.
Julie Kennel: look for the form that is the least you know, has is the most affordable.
Julie Kennel: Oftentimes that will be like a farmed version of salmon versus a wild form of salmon.
Julie Kennel: farmed salmon and wild salmon have their advantages and disadvantages. That farm raised. Salmon may not be as rich in Omega, 3 s. As the wild caught salmon, but the farm raised. Salmon may also be lower in Pcbs or other toxins. So they have their trade-offs. And it's okay to kind of mix and match, and have farmed fish or farmed salmon every once in a while.
Julie Kennel: Choose those lean meats like chicken or turkey, or even ground beef, just make sure it's lean at least 93% lean ground beef.
Julie Kennel: and don't forget about eggs and dairy and dairy alternatives, which are a great low cost option that are easy to make.
Julie Kennel: And what about that good old peanut butter and jelly sandwich? Right? Peanut butter is a is an affordable protein. It's also versatile. Right? You can put it on a sandwich, but you can also put it in peanut butter or on top of pancakes, and use it to really help boost the protein content of your breakfast in addition to snacks
Julie Kennel: who doesn't like this time of year, an apple with some peanut butter on it.
Julie Kennel: The last idea about about
Julie Kennel: food on a healthy budget is to try to reduce food waste by planning to use leftovers
Julie Kennel: freezing items when you have too much of them, or they're about to go to waste
Julie Kennel: or adopt and adopt a use it up. Mentality
Julie Kennel: planning for leftovers can seem a little daunting at first, st especially if you're a person who doesn't like leftovers.
Julie Kennel: What do you do then?
Julie Kennel: Well, leftovers don't have to taste terrible. You can often use a protein such as chicken to become chicken salad or chicken quesadillas, or throw it into a soup.
Julie Kennel: You can use leftover vegetables as well where you might have integrated it into one dish the night before, and are now making something else out of it.
Julie Kennel: You can use artificial intelligence to come up with all kinds of ideas for ways to plan and use leftovers.
Julie Kennel: Another idea here is to freeze it
Julie Kennel: a lot of times. We have too much. We accidentally bought too much of the fresh option, and now we need to do something about it.
Julie Kennel: I think about this when I think about those bananas right
Julie Kennel: when they're past the state at which I would ever eat one fresh. I can throw it in the freezer, and eventually make some ice cream or some muffins or some banana bread out of it. Later
Julie Kennel: you can use the same technique with things like sweet potatoes.
Julie Kennel: so if you have too many of them, you can mash them up and freeze them for a few individual portions that you can quickly reheat as an easy side.
Julie Kennel: When you cook chicken breasts you can slice and dice it and put it into containers. Keep one in the fridge, but put a couple in the freezer, and they're net ready to go right when you need them.
Julie Kennel: There's lots of tricks to learn. Here again, the more you kind of look, open your mind up to what, how this, how to use freezing it, or how to save on reducing food waste the easier that it gets
Julie Kennel: using that use it up. Mentality, right? Can be a fun way to gather all the ingredients at risk of being wasted
Julie Kennel: and get creative.
Julie Kennel: culinary, creative.
Julie Kennel: Almost anything can be tossed into soups, stir fries, tacos, and salads.
Julie Kennel: I hope you enjoyed this presentation, and as you're thinking about different ways in which you can bring your food costs down.
Julie Kennel: enjoy.
  