  The average American sits for 13 hours a day.
  That's 21 hours sedentary if you count sleep.
  Our ancestors from even just a hundred years ago
  sat for about three hours a day.
  And sitting too much contributes
  to many health complications like overeating,
  hypertension, diabetes, obesity, amongst others.
  Welcome back everyone.
  I'm Dr. Carmen Swain, your instructor,
  who each week encourages you to move more.
  And today we are going to discuss the pitfalls that exist
  when we do the opposite of moving and we just sit there.
  Sitting is the new smoking?
  Sure, yeah.
  It sounds a little out there, but think about it though.
  Especially if you think of your life after college,
  when you're a full-on adult, what do you do?
  You wake up and then you sit down and eat breakfast.
  You might browse your social media feeds,
  catch up on some news or maybe some emails.
  And then you drive or take the train to work sitting down.
  You're at work for eight, maybe even 10 hours,
  even eating your lunch in your chair.
  Then you commute back home only to crash on the couch
  and to watch some TV and eat some dinner
  before heading to bed and repeating the cycle again.
  This is probably not far off for most folks.
  And unbeknownst to most,
  even if you exercise for an hour a day,
  you cannot mitigate those harms of sitting
  for the rest of the day.
  The human body was meant to move
  and the brain needs the body to move
  in order for it to function and develop optimally.
  That goes for adults as much as for kids.
  The main concept, the heart of it all,
  of sitting being the new smoking is this concept of NEAT,
  non-exercise activity thermogenesis, NEAT.
  This is the energy expended for everything that we do
  that is not sleeping, eating, or sports-like exercise.
  It ranges from the energy expended like walking to work,
  typing, performing yard work,
  undertaking agricultural tasks,
  and even things like fidgeting.
  Even trivial physical activities
  increase our metabolic rate, substantially even.
  And it is the cumulative impact
  of a multitude of exothermic actions
  that culminate in an individual's daily NEAT.
  It is therefore not surprising
  that NEAT explains a vast majority
  of an individual's non-resting energy needs.
  Some epidemiological studies have highlighted
  the importance of culture in promoting NEAT.
  We know that agricultural and manual workers have high NEAT,
  whereas the wealthy and industrialization
  appears to decrease NEAT.
  Let's look a little closer at the importance of NEAT.
  Most people believe exercise
  is the key to weight loss and health.
  While it certainly is important,
  there is another physical activity
  that may be far more important, movement.
  Dr. James Levine is credited
  for his research and findings on NEAT.
  According to Dr. Levine,
  you can expend calories in one of two ways.
  One is to go to the gym,
  and the other is through all the activities
  of daily living called NEAT.
  And it appears that NEAT is far more important
  for calorie burning than exercise in nearly everyone.
  It's technically referred to
  as non-exercise-associated thermogenesis.
  NEAT sounds kind of fancy, but it's often ignored,
  but a crucial part of our metabolism.
  You see, NEAT burns 200% more daily calories than exercise.
  The tick, tick, ticking of the clock
  and the furious patter of computer keys
  are staples in offices around the world.
  Regardless of the specific business,
  offices share many similarities.
  One such similarity is a sedentary culture.
  In the last 50 years,
  the number of moderately active jobs has steadily declined.
  While the sedentary and light activity jobs have increased.
  This increasing trend is also seen
  in the prevalence of obesity in US adults
  that has steadily ticked upward over the past 50 years,
  which has put us in a position we are now,
  a national epidemic.
  The truth is evident.
  Americans are spending more time seated than ever before.
  And researchers agree, it's wreaking havoc on our bodies.
  Why does sitting cause so much damage?
  How does sitting impact you physiologically?
  How does it hurt your body?
  Well, let me tell you, as soon as you sit,
  the electrical activity in your leg muscles turns off.
  Your caloric burn drops down to just one calorie per minute.
  The enzymes that help break down fat drop 90%.
  And after two hours of sitting,
  your good cholesterol drops 20%.
  After 24 hours, your insulin effectiveness drops 24%.
  And your risk of diabetes increases.
  People with sitting jobs have twice the rate
  of cardiovascular disease as people with standing jobs.
  Another reason that the smoking analogy is relevant
  is that studies have repeatedly shown
  that the effects of long-term sitting
  are not reversible through exercise or other good habits.
  A study published in the American Journal of Epidemiology
  found that men and women who sat more than six hours a day
  died earlier than their counterparts,
  who limited sitting time to three hours a day or less.
  The study surveyed over 53,000 men and over 69,000 women
  who were healthy at the start of the study.
  And over the course of the next 14-year follow-up,
  they saw a higher rate of mortality
  amongst the frequent sitters.
  Associations were strongest
  for cardiovascular disease mortality.
  And the time spent sitting
  was independently associated with total mortality,
  regardless of a person's physical activity level.
  Sitting, like smoking, is very clearly bad for our health.
  And the only way to minimize the risk
  is to limit the time we spend on our butts each day.
  If you need a little bit more encouragement,
  take a look back at all the ways sitting is killing you.
  And then scour Pinterest to find some ways
  to make your own standing desk.
  And researchers in Australia agree.
  Even if you engaged in the recommended daily
  and weekly levels of physical activity,
  but you spend a lot of time sitting,
  you still increase your risk for chronic diseases
  and also a shortened lifespan.
  This active couch potato, so to speak,
  that is a person who accumulates
  the recommended 30 minutes of physical activity,
  but then spends the rest of the day seated or sedentary,
  is still at a greater or increased risk of death
  and increased disease risk.
  How does too much sitting affect our health?
  Physical activity is defined as any bodily movement
  produced by skeletal muscle
  that requires energy expenditure.
  Physical inactivity, lack of physical activity,
  has been identified as the fourth leading risk factor
  for global mortality.
  Moreover, physical inactivity is estimated
  to be the main cause for numerous other disease burdens.
  Globally, around 31% of adults
  were insufficiently active back in 2008.
  This is approximately 28% of males and 34% of females.
  Approximately 3.2 million deaths each year
  are attributed to insufficient physical activity.
  Globally, the prevalence of insufficient physical activity
  is highest in the Americas
  and the Eastern Mediterranean region.
  In both of these regions,
  almost 50% of women are insufficiently active,
  while the prevalence for men is about 40%.
  Comparatively, the Southeast Asian region
  showed the lowest percentages,
  15% for males and 19% inactivity for females.
  In all of the world's regions,
  men are more active than women,
  with the biggest difference being between the two sexes
  in Eastern Mediterranean regions.
  The current levels of physical inactivity
  are partly due to insufficient participation
  in physical activity during leisure time
  and an increase in sedentary behavior
  during occupational and domestic activities.
  Likewise, an increase in the use of passive modes
  of transport has also been associated
  with declining physical activity levels.
  Another factor, increased urbanization,
  has resulted in several environmental factors,
  which may discourage participation in physical activities.
  Things such as high density traffic,
  violence, low air quality, pollution,
  lack of parks, sidewalks and sports
  or recreational facilities.
  What we need are population-based,
  multisectoral, multidisciplinary
  and culturally relevant policies
  that are implemented
  to increase physical activity levels globally.
  Research has shown us that over 30%
  of cardiovascular disease cases
  are a direct result of too much sitting.
  Middle-aged men who sat more hours per week
  and obtained less physical activity
  had a greater risk for premature myocardial infarction
  or a heart attack, as seen in caption A.
  Those who sit more also have higher mortality
  from coronary artery disease, as seen in figure C.
  These general findings were subsequently confirmed
  in studies in middle-aged women, in reference B,
  and also in the elderly group, as seen in D.
  Researchers have found and continue to find evidence
  that prolonged sitting increases the risk
  of developing several serious illnesses
  like various types of cancer, heart disease
  and type 2 diabetes.
  Research also indicates that physical inactivity
  is estimated to be the main cause
  for approximately 30% of diabetes cases.
  A goal of one research study
  was to determine whether or not interrupting
  prolonged sitting with brief bouts
  of light-intensity walking or simple resistance activities
  would improve after-meal cardiometabolic risk markers
  in adults with type 2 diabetes.
  In a randomized crossover trial,
  24 inactive, overweight or obese adults
  with type 2 diabetes underwent the following
  eight-hour conditions on three separate days.
  Either uninterrupted sitting
  or sitting plus three-minute bouts
  of light walking every 30 minutes
  or sitting with three-minute bouts
  of simple resistance activities every 30 minutes.
  Standardized meals were consumed during each condition
  and glucose, insulin, C-peptide and triglycerides
  were compared between conditions.
  Conclusions from this study
  show that interrupting prolonged sitting
  with brief bouts of light walking
  or simple resistance activities
  attenuates the acute post-meal glucose,
  insulin, C-peptide and triglyceride response
  in adults with type 2 diabetes.
  We know that this population has poor adherence
  to structured exercise,
  but this simple approach yields a potentially beneficial
  and practical way to impact health.
  Can sitting actually increase your risk of cancer?
  Data from 43 observational studies,
  including a total of thousands and thousands
  and thousands of cancer studies,
  have been analyzed and results reveal
  that sedentary behavior is associated
  with increased risks of certain types of cancer.
  It has also been determined that too much inactivity
  impacts obesity and overweight in our population.
  Inactivity over prolonged periods of time
  precedes weight gain
  and promotes increases in fat mass and obesity.
  We also know that our non-exercise activity thermogenesis
  is a highly variable component
  of our daily total energy expenditure.
  Meat is an important contributor to weight maintenance
  and could represent a promising tool for body mass control.
  In our busy modern world,
  it seems evident that both biological
  and overwhelming environmental influences
  facilitate a seated lifestyle.
  Because of the enormity of the problem of obesity
  in our society,
  and because of the magnitude of meat deficit,
  it has been suggested that we should design
  and evaluate both our personal behavioral approaches
  and re-engineered environments
  in order to promote active life and health.
  In terms of appropriate activities,
  it can be relatively easy to increase meat.
  Move more.
  Standing instead of sitting
  burns three times more calories per hour.
  Gum chewing increases energy expenditure four times
  and stair climbing more than 40 times
  above your resting values.
  Ambulation, walking in particular can raise meat
  and it is easily performed at almost any place
  and at any time.
  But how can a goal of 2.5 hours of additional ambulation,
  standing time, be realistically integrated
  into our daily routines?
  A key problem is that our occupations
  and our personal lives regularly contribute to
  and prohibit this degree of adaptation.
  One's occupation is the principle determinant
  of meat in adulthood
  and can represent an efficient means
  of promoting physical activity.
  How meat can be primarily integrated
  at the site of occupation needs examining.
  Let's make sure we give it
  the appropriate attention it deserves.
  With billions of people worldwide
  performing jobs in front of computers
  or around conference tables,
  it's time to rebel against workday inactivity
  and to adopt new approaches that encourage movement.
  Frequent low intensity physical activity
  such as intermittent standing during the workday
  has far reaching benefits associated
  with employee health, wellness,
  productivity and satisfaction.
  This in turn can have a positive organizational impact
  on corporate culture, absenteeism, presenteeism,
  retention and healthcare costs.
  Whether it's standing meetings, walking paths,
  sit to stand workstations,
  employers can embrace movement in a way
  that has a positive impact on employee health
  and productivity every single day.
  I think meat is pretty neat and I hope you do too.
  I want you to consider all the ways
  you may be sitting too much.
  Eating, driving, riding the bus,
  studying, scrolling social media, watching TV.
  Now I want you to consider ways
  that you could increase your meat.
  Try them out and report back in our discussion this week.
  What's your favorite way to increase your meat?
